---
layout: post
title: Reflections on becaming (partially) deaf
date: 2016-06-03 13:00:00 +0000
categories: hearthstone
---

# Reflections on becoming (partially) deaf

I am in Reykjavíc for a conference.  It's a beautiful country. Stark and
minimal with buildings that look like they've been put up temporarily rather
than being permanent additions to the landscape.  

Unfortunately I also have ear ache.  I've had a bad build up of wax recently
and just before leaving went swimming and got water trapped and now my right
ear is infected and my hearing is gone in that ear (or severely muffled).  With
nothing to help me but ibuprofen[^2] until Tuesday when I get home and can see
a doctor[^1].

I have a couple of thoughts about the whole experience. 

1. Ibuprofen is the greatest human invention of all time.  Pain is awful and
   without it I'd be screaming in agony all the time.  Fuck pain. #epicurianism
2. Deafness, even partial deafness, is completely isolating.  I can't follow
   conversations or talk to people.  
3. Cars terrify me.  Never mind them driving on the wrong side of the road, I
   cant see them coming and every time i cross the road i get a scare when a
   car pulls up to let me pass.
4. My phone is a life line.  Without being able to talk to friends via text
   messages I'd be completely isolated and go mad.
5. People, even after you tell them you cant hear, look at you oddly and think
   you mad when you fail to understand them.

Point 4 is especially pertinent.  My grand mother died last year after going
deaf and then mad.  Mum always insisted the madness was separate but having
experienced deafness even for a few days im certain it was not.

Without the ability to talk to people meaningfully and only books for company
her madness is completely understandable.  I am going mad and am difficult to
understand and nonsensical after two days never mind two years. 

People offered her iPads to FaceTime and video chat and read books on kindle
but as an elderly technophobe she naturally refused.  I am thinking that
actually text messages would have bern the killer feature.  With them she would
have been able to talk clearly again. 

People accuse my generation of being antisocial on our phones and computers all
the time never paying attention to whats going on around them but I am
increasingly of the opposite view we are more social and were pickier about who
we spend our time with.  Why chat to strangers when we can talk to our friends?
Why make idle chitchat when we can read the paper anytime anywhere for free.
Its not that were antisocial were just choosing not to devote our entire
attention to things that do not interest us. 

Many years ago I learnt a little sign language because my university offered
courses cheap.  The deaf community was welcoming to a point but were very
isolationist.  The deaf staff were known for picking fights with the
audiologists before they were all thrown out.  They saw the audiologists as
trying to destroy their culture.  At the time i thought them mad but i guess i
can see their argument now.  Not being able to hear feels incredibly isolating.
Other people feel distant.  A culture that grew around deafness would see those
with hearing as a bunch of privileged jerks.  Ive been a teensy bit deaf for
two days and i already think that. 

Anyway.  Ear ache sucks.  Pain killers are *fucking fantastic*.  Iceland is
pretty.  Time to go see a volcano.

[^1]:  Or my partner who is a damn ear-nose-throat surgeon specialising in
ears.  Typical.  One time I bloody need them!

[^2]: Don't trust Icelandic pharmacists who recommended I take a fatal dose.
Check with a real doctor.
